[Merged by Bors] - Add Run a Node guide (#3681)
sigp/lighthouse: book/src/run_a_node.md

# Run a Node

This document provides detail for users who want to run a Lighthouse beacon node.
You should be finished with one [Installation](./installation.md) of your choice to continue with the following steps:

1. Perform [Checkpoint sync](#step-1-checkpoint-sync); and
2. [Connect to an execution engine](#step-2-connect-to-an-execution-engine).

Checkpoint sync is *optional*; however,  we recommend it since it is substantially faster
than syncing from genesis while still providing all the same features.

> ## Step 1: Checkpoint sync

Reviewer: I think we could break this down into more granular steps like:

1. Choose a checkpoint sync provider (describe just how to choose the URL)
2. Set up an execution node (link to EL docs, etc)
3. Run Lighthouse
4. Check logs (example of `INFO Starting checkpoint sync` and `INFO Synced`)
5. Further reading (links to other sections like Becoming a Validator, Validator Monitor, Checkpoint Sync, Merge-Migration, HTTP API, etc).

In step 3 we show an example of the full command-line used for a staking node and a non-staking node respectively, e.g.

Staking:

```bash
lighthouse bn \
  --http \
  --checkpoint-sync-url https://mainnet.checkpoint.sigp.io \
  --execution-endpoint http://localhost:8551 \
  --execution-jwt /secrets/jwt.hex 
```

Non-staking:

```bash
lighthouse bn \
  --checkpoint-sync-url https://mainnet.checkpoint.sigp.io \
  --execution-endpoint http://localhost:8551 \
  --execution-jwt /secrets/jwt.hex \
  --disable-deposit-contract-sync
```

  `http://localhost:8551`.
- `--execution-jwt <FILE>`: the path to the file containing the JWT secret shared by Lighthouse and the
  execution engine. This is a mandatory form of authentication that ensures that Lighthouse
has authority to control the execution engine.

```
lighthouse bn --execution-endpoint <URL> --execution-jwt <FILE>
```
Each execution engine has its own flags for configuring the engine API and JWT.
Please consult the relevant page of your execution engine for the required flags:

- [Geth: Connecting to Consensus Clients](https://geth.ethereum.org/docs/interface/consensus-clients)
- [Nethermind: Running Nethermind & CL](https://docs.nethermind.io/nethermind/first-steps-with-nethermind/running-nethermind-post-merge)
- [Besu: Connect to Mainnet](https://besu.hyperledger.org/en/stable/public-networks/get-started/connect/mainnet/)

The execution engine connection must be **exclusive**, i.e. you must have one execution node
per beacon node. The reason for this is that the beacon node _controls_ the execution node. Please
see the [FAQ](#faq) for further information about why many:1 and 1:many configurations are not
supported.

> ### FAQ

Reviewer: Rather than duplicating the FAQ I think we can link to the FAQs on the merge migration and checkpoint sync pages

# Run a Node

This document provides detail for users who want to run a Lighthouse beacon node.
You should be finished with one [Installation](./installation.md) of your choice to continue with the following steps:

1. Enable [checkpoint sync](#step-1-checkpoint-sync);

> 1. Set up an [execution node](#step-2-set-up-an-execution-node);

Reviewer: I'm torn as to whether we should swap the checkpoint sync and execution node sections, seeing as we talk about copying a URL to the clipboard.

1. Run [Lighthouse](#step-3-run-lighthouse);
1. [Check logs](#step-4-check-logs); and
1. [Further readings](#step-5-further-readings).

> Checkpoint sync is *optional*; however,  we recommend it since it is substantially faster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Checkpoint sync is *optional*; however, we recommend it since it is substantially faster
```

than syncing from genesis while still providing all the same features.

## Step 1: Choose a checkpoint sync provider

> Since version 2.0.0 Lighthouse supports syncing from a recent finalized checkpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lighthouse supports fast sync from a recent finalized checkpoint.
```

The checkpoint sync can be done using [another synced beacon node](#automatic-checkpoint-sync) or a [public endpoint](#use-a-community-checkpoint-sync-endpoint) provided by the Ethereum community.

In [step 3](#step-3-run-lighthouse), when running Lighthouse,
we will enable checkpoint sync by providing the URL to the `--checkpoint-sync-url` flag.

> For now, we will copy the URL to the clipboard, selected in one of the following ways.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For now, we will copy the URL to the clipboard.
```

I think lets streamline this to recommend using a community endpoint, and add an aside about syncing from an existing node.

### Automatic checkpoint sync

To begin automatic checkpoint sync you will need HTTP API access to another synced beacon node.
In this case, the URL could look like this: `http://remote-bn:5052`.

> **Security Note**: You should cross-reference the `block_root` and `slot` of the loaded checkpoint

> > against a trusted source like a friend's node, or a block explorer.

Reviewer: Let's delete this section from here and move the checkpoint sync security check to the `Check logs` section.

### Use a community checkpoint sync endpoint

The Ethereum community provides various [public endpoints](https://eth-clients.github.io/checkpoint-sync-endpoints/) for you to choose from for your initial checkpoint state. Select one for your network and use it as the URL.

> For example, the URL for the checkpoint sync of the mainnet from Sigma Prime is `https://mainnet.checkpoint.sigp.io`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the URL for Sigma Prime's checkpoint sync server for mainnet is `https://mainnet.checkpoint.sigp.io`,
```

which we will use in [step 3](#step-3-run-lighthouse).

## Step 2: Set up an execution node

The Lighthouse beacon node *must* connect to an execution engine in order to validate the transactions
present in blocks. Two flags are used to configure this connection:

- `--execution-endpoint`: the *URL* of the execution engine API. Often this will be
  `http://localhost:8551`.
- `--execution-jwt`: the *path* to the file containing the JWT secret shared by Lighthouse and the
  execution engine. This is a mandatory form of authentication that ensures that Lighthouse
has authority to control the execution engine.

Each execution engine has its own flags for configuring the engine API and JWT.
Please consult the relevant page of your execution engine for the required flags:

- [Geth: Connecting to Consensus Clients](https://geth.ethereum.org/docs/interface/consensus-clients)
- [Nethermind: Running Nethermind & CL](https://docs.nethermind.io/nethermind/first-steps-with-nethermind/running-nethermind-post-merge)

> - [Besu: Connect to Mainnet](https://besu.hyperledger.org/en/stable/public-networks/get-started/connect/mainnet/)

Reviewer: Let's add Erigon to this section (and the merge migration docs). I think the go-to URL is https://github.com/ledgerwatch/erigon#beacon-chain-consensus-layer

The execution engine connection must be *exclusive*, i.e. you must have one execution node
per beacon node. The reason for this is that the beacon node _controls_ the execution node.

## Step 3: Run Lighthouse

To run Lighthouse, we use the three flags from the steps above:
- `--checkpoint-sync-url`;
- `--execution-endpoint`; and
- `--execution-jwt`.

Additionally, we run Lighthouse with the `--network` flag, which selects a network:

- `lighthouse` (no flag): Mainnet.
- `lighthouse --network mainnet`: Mainnet.

> - `lighthouse --network prater`: Prater (testnet).

Author: Is 'Prater' still the current testnet?

Reviewer: Kind of. It merged with Goerli and we support both names as an alias for the same thing. I think in these user-facing docs we may as well call it Goerli and link to the Goerli homepage: https://goerli.net/

The other long-lived testnet is Sepolia, which I think we should list too (https://sepolia.dev/).

And for completeness, Gnosis chain (https://www.gnosis.io/), which is a side-chain using Ethereum consensus.

Using the correct `--network` flag is very important; using the wrong flag can
result in penalties, slashings or lost deposits. As a rule of thumb, *always*
provide a `--network` flag instead of relying on the default.

Minor modifications depend on if you want to run your node while [staking](#staking) or [non-staking](#non-staking).
In the following, we will provide examples of what a Lighthouse setup could look like.

### Staking

```
lighthouse bn \
  --network mainnet \
  --checkpoint-sync-url https://mainnet.checkpoint.sigp.io \
  --execution-endpoint http://localhost:8551 \
  --execution-jwt /secrets/jwt.hex \
  --http
```

> A Lighthouse beacon node can be configured to expose an HTTP server by supplying the `--http` flag. The default listen address is `127.0.0.1:5052`.

Reviewer: Let's add a sentence here about why the HTTP flag is needed:

> The HTTP API is required for the beacon node to accept connections from the _validator _client_, which manages keys.

### Non-staking

``` 
lighthouse bn \
  --network mainnet \
  --checkpoint-sync-url https://mainnet.checkpoint.sigp.io \
  --execution-endpoint http://localhost:8551 \
  --execution-jwt /secrets/jwt.hex \
  --disable-deposit-contract-sync
```

Since we are not staking, we can use the `--disable-deposit-contract-sync` flag.

---

Once Lighthouse runs, we can monitor the logs to see if it is syncing correctly.

> ## Step 4: Check logs

Author: Is the 'Check logs' information I provide enough? Is there anything I could add or delete?
I'm struggling the most to apply appropriate information for this section

Reviewer: I think it's sufficient!

Several logs help you identify if Lighthouse is running correctly. 

### Logs - Checkpoint sync
Lighthouse will print a message to indicate that checkpoint sync is being used:

```
INFO Starting checkpoint sync                remote_url: http://remote-bn:8000/, service: beacon
```

After a short time (usually less than a minute), it will log the details of the checkpoint
loaded from the remote beacon node:

```
INFO Loaded checkpoint block and state       state_root: 0xe8252c68784a8d5cc7e5429b0e95747032dd1dcee0d1dc9bdaf6380bf90bc8a6, block_root: 0x5508a20147299b1a7fe9dbea1a8b3bf979f74c52e7242039bd77cbff62c0695a, slot: 2034720, service: beacon

> ```

Reviewer: This is where we should add a note about checking the checkpoint against one of the providers from https://eth-clients.github.io/checkpoint-sync-endpoints/, with another aside about "or a friend's node/block explorer"

Once the checkpoint is loaded Lighthouse will sync forwards to the head of the chain.

If a validator client is connected to the node then it will be able to start completing its duties
as soon as forwards sync completes.

#### Backfilling Blocks

Once forwards sync completes, Lighthouse will commence a "backfill sync" to download the blocks
from the checkpoint back to genesis.

The beacon node will log messages similar to the following each minute while it completes backfill
sync:

```
INFO Downloading historical blocks  est_time: 5 hrs 0 mins, speed: 111.96 slots/sec, distance: 2020451 slots (40 weeks 0 days), service: slot_notifier
```

Once backfill is complete, a `INFO Historical block download complete` log will be emitted.

> Check out the [FAQ](./checkpoint-sync.md#faq) for more information on the checkpoint sync.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check out the [FAQ](./checkpoint-sync.md#faq) for more information on checkpoint sync.
```

# Run a Node

This document provides detail for users who want to run a Lighthouse beacon node.

> You should be finished with one [Installation](./installation.md) of your choice to continue with the following steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should be finished with one [Installation](./installation.md) method of your choice to continue with the following steps:
```

1. Set up an [execution node](#step-1-set-up-an-execution-node);
1. Enable [checkpoint sync](#step-2-choose-a-checkpoint-sync-provider);
1. Run [Lighthouse](#step-3-run-lighthouse);
1. [Check logs](#step-4-check-logs); and
1. [Further readings](#step-5-further-readings).

Checkpoint sync is *optional*; however, we recommend it since it is substantially faster

> than syncing from genesis while still providing all the same features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
than syncing from genesis while still providing the same functionality.
```
